



**NA Chart times**
* Drop noteevents with NA chart times? 68.11% are NA
* For sepsis patients, all the NA times are from ECG and Echo notes.

* **Structure text**
	* Have Medical History



- Chart times after 4 hours from the first chart time / from admission time

  

- NAN values?

        - If a newline happens in between matching parens, then ignore newline

        - Identify prose v nonprose. Use nltk.sent_tokenize on prose

            - not perfect, but it is pretty good with ignoring mid-sentence newlines

  

 - ecg reports are very short & seem to be exclusively prose

        - echo reports are VERY structured. definitely useful to do a echo-specific one

        - nursing notes have a linear structure. sections are easily identifiable

        - nursing_other notes are typically very short (and parse-able)

        - radiology reports have lots of "________________________" sections

            - seems like they always have "MEDICAL CONDITION" and "FINAL REPORT" sections

        - found list example where "1." is its own line and its info is own next line :/

            - could be rehab-specific for notes

        - strong consistency format in social_work

  

  

In this study, we considered Nursing, Nursing/Other, Physician, and Radiology notes because these kinds of notes are in the majority of clinical notes and are frequently recorded. We only extract the first 6 hours’ notes for each admission. 

  

Word embeddings:

map words or phrases from vocabulary to a corresponding vector of continuous values. 

  

Utilise paragraph vector (Doc2Vec) to learn the emnedding of each clinical note. 

  

  

Discharge summaries are data leakage





