
**Shiv**
* Can you identify the scale for risk score? 1 - 40?


**Alex edits:**
* HIVE - is good
* Include the missing ICD9 codes in the top section - phrase as a problem
* remove false positive section - add to final project




**Send to Hamza**
* methods for standardising
* Methods for imputing time 


**how to visualise time series?**


**change task names to reflect the Example proposal**



Do we output the probability or risk score? 
Probability will be mapped to risk score





* Feature selection
	* T-SNE

	* PCA  
		* For dimensionality reduction for both demographic data and time series 
	* Apply domain knowledge 
		* Rely on client's expertise, current relevant literature
		*





* Imbalanced data set
	* percentage of sepsis stays 
	* stratified sampling

We are splitting by admission (based on HADM_ID), not by size of dataset (horizon)






At the patient encounter level, the prevalence of sepsis in our case-control sample is 6.15%, which is equivalent to the estimated sepsis’s prevalence of around 6% in hospitals[19](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-021-20910-4#ref-CR19). Given that the data is imbalanced, we need to identify an appropriate technique for sampling. 
		* we applied the synthetic minority over-sampling technique (SMOTE) to achieve 1:1 balanced data for sepsis cases and non-sepsis controls (at the clinical note level).
		* For comparative purposes, we also develop, test, and report the models without any oversampling to present the possibility of operating this algorithm in a normal clinical environment where the prevalence of sepsis is relatively low
	* SMOTE (oversampling instead of undersampling)
	* The amount of data is limited. Therefore, the train-test split of data faces a trade off, for avoiding overfitting. Hence, careful considerations has to be taken into account for efficient sampling.
- - - - Artificial intelligence in sepsis early prediction and diagnosis using unstructured data in healthcare




----
Task 4:
Compare to prediction of model back to model
- divide HADM_ID
- Visualisation of MIMIC III set shows that
	- Observe patterns, the similarities in MIMIC set
- We can allocate to new Y-truth 
	- our output is 
- Create new label
- Focus on quality of the dataset
- 




(1, 0)
(0, 1) = red --> indicates potential sepsis - it was not labelled as sepsis, but we predicted it as being sepsis
(1, 1) (0, 0)




______





Outline of deliverables:
1. source coding 
	1. final model 
		1. mode
	2. extra EDA session to generalise to other WA real life data
	3. 
2. Final report
	1. Methodolgy
		1. how we prepared
		2. trained
		3. selected
	2. Discussion
		1. Local / global feature importance





Sepsis is a life-threatening host response to infection associated with high mortality, morbidity, and health costs. Its management is highly time-sensitive since each hour of delayed treatment increases mortality due to irreversible organ damage. Meanwhile, despite decades of clinical research, robust biomarkers for sepsis are missing. Therefore, detecting sepsis early by utilizing the affluence of high-resolution intensive care records has become a challenging machine learning problem.

It has a highly variable clinical course, requiring constant monitoring of the patient's state to guide the management of intravenous fluids and vasopressors, among other interventions. Despite decades of research, there's still debate among experts on optimal treatment


_____

To develop a machine learning model, or a series of machine learning models?

To determine which 
alerts 


With no reliable biomarkers for early detection, sepsis remains a critical medical condition associated with high rates of mortality, and healthcare costs. 
Timely intervention is crucial. Originating from the body's severe response to infection, the comp



The complexities involved in diagnosing and managing sepsis contribute to its status as a leading cause of death in hospitals. Originating from the body's reaction to an infection, sepsis can quickly escalate to more critical and potentially fatal stages within a matter of hours, making timely intervention crucial. At Royal Perth Hospital (RPH), medical professionals currently rely upon clinical judgement, manual disease scoring systems and diagnostic criteria to identify potential sepsis in patients. 
early symptoms of sepsis, including fever, increased heart rate, and fatigue are often vague, overlooked. This leads to a degree of subjectivity among medical staff in interpreting clinical data and symptoms, resulting in inconsistent risk evaluations for sepsis, potential misdiagnoses, and delays in administering timely treatment.  

The Health in a Virtual Environment (HIVE) is Western Australia’s first in-patient remote monitoring service, allowing for continuous data collection and analysis by clinicians without the constant presence of bedside staff. 

Patient data is high-dimensional and heterogenous, and features relevant to sepsis prediction will be measured from the time of the patient's admission to the ward. 

This system is particularly useful for monitoring multiple patients at once, improving resource allocation, and enhancing the overall quality of care. When admitted to a ward, patient data is collected in variety of methods, measurements and intervals. The high-dimensional, and heterogeneous electronic medical record data, including both structured and unstructured data that evolve in a time-sensitive fashion at irregular intervals, as well as static data, such as demographic data. This makes it challenging to adopt a singular model for sepsis diagnosis that generalises well across different patients, as well as different hospitals across Western Australia.  


To support timely intervention for sepsis progression



- Support medical decision-making through an easily interpretable risk score that reflects the likelihood of a patient developing sepsis.

- In order to accurately predict sepsis onset, the models need to simulate and understand irregularly collected data over time, particularly focusing on the relationships between past and present data points in order to identify abnormalities that are present in the lead up to a sepsis event. SIRS criteria may fall short in capturing the complexity of sepsis due to the lack of sufficient features, so composite features, which aren’t easily defined by clinicians in a real-time scenario, may improve the accuracy of the prediction. However the dynamics of a sepsis progression can be subtle, which is why it is important for the model to maintain context of the patient risk profile over time. 
- the healthcare staff at the HIVE, alerting them only when there is a valid, current risk, thereby minimising false alarms and ultimately enhancing the efficiency of the RPH healthcare system. 
    
That captures the complexity of patient data evolving over time





Whilst the model must accurately identify abnormalities that are present in the lead up to sepsis, another challenge is how it maintain context of the patient data over the period of their admission. 

Another major challenge is in the model's ability to maintain context of the previous 


* maintain context in order to minimise 


A common challenge faced with technology in health is managing the sensitivity and specificity of the model.



Due to the symptoms being non-specific and overlapping with other conditions, the 


Whilst suspicion of sepsis is enough to enact a treatment plan, this also impacts the quality of medical records. 





____
The R

To facilitate the identification of 
New feature engineering techniques will be used to identify features of interest




healthcare data that 

To identify features within the RPH data 

The main aim of this project is to develop a machine learning model that accurately predicts the risk of a patient developing sepsis using real-time patient pathology and time-series data collected throughout the patients admission. The model developed has the specific aims to:
* In order to support medical clinicians make 
* Utilise the full high-resolution data collected by RPH to identify and communicate important features that  identifying sepsis onset. 
* Dynamically adapt to new information
* Reduce the time onset

- as well as other hospitals around WA.


With the 
quality of medical records formal diagnosis

Support the innovative approach that HIVE are taking 
serve as a pioneering example for other Western Australian hospitals looking to adopt supportive technology in healthcare.



To investigate which modelsdetect high-risk patients quicker, at more consistent intervals, and on a larger scale compared to traditional manual risk assessment techniques. 


- By automating the initial stages of data interpretation, healthcare providers at RPH can focus their attention on patients who are at the highest risk, and optimise use of limited resources.

support medical decision-making by











To capture the complexity of 

To gather and analyse statistics on a combination of RPH and MIMIC-III data. This will 
in order to identify abnormalities that present over time in the lead up to a sepsis event, 

To utlise a 


Ensure that this 



The absence of reliable biomarkers and vagueness of early symptoms of sepsis, such as fever and increased heart rate, introduce subjectivity and ambiguity. This increases the likelihood for inconsistent sepsis risk evaluations amongst clinicians, potential misdiagnosis of patients, and delayed treatments. 


As time is such an important factor in the management and treatment of sepsis, 
Certain data points important to early sepsis identification derive from blood samples done in 
gathered from lab results may prove 

anonymised 
anonimised 


- To make the model generalisable to statistics from a mixture of  of identify abnormalities that are present in the lead up to a sepsis event from a mixture of datasets. This will



To support medical decisions made by hospital clinicians in the timely identification of patients at risk of developing sepsis. 




To compare the effectiveness of multiple models when working with the RPH patient data. 
The model should be robust
It should capture the complexity of sepsis
It should maintain context of the patient over time



To gather and analyse historic patient data to identify potential biomarkers
Will use a combination of ananymised RPH patient data and MIMIC-III data
to make sure that the model generalises to the RPH real world patient data


To ge

To analyse historical patient data, including anonymized RPH patient records and MIMIC-III datasets, with the objective of identifying potential biomarkers for sepsis. This comprehensive data analysis aims to ensure that the resulting machine learning model is not only accurate but also generalizable to real-world patient scenarios encountered at Royal Perth Hospital (RPH).



To improve patient outcomes and hospital efficiency by identifying the onset of sepsis in its early stages of progression based on

Develop 
reprocess and 
Monitor the 



_______
In order to accurately predict sepsis onset, the models need to simulate and understand irregularly collected data over time, particularly focusing on the relationships between past and present data points in order to identify abnormalities that are present in the lead up to a sepsis event. 
It's important to develop a machine learning model that is aware of context

Traditional statistical 


Improving quality of sepsis prediction by 




_______


With a significant proportion of sepsis cases (approximately 50% - 60%) typically missed during clinical coding, misclassified cases of sepsis present during model training will negatively impact the performance of supervised models. To address this, we propose an assessment on the quality of sepsis ICD9 code within the MIMIC-III dataset in order to uncover hidden patterns in potentially mislabeled data. This will involve a clustering analysis on the dataset through K-means Clustering, and visualising the comparisons between model predictions and labeled data in the MIMIC-III dataset using UMAP.  By identifying patterns of discrepancies in clusters, we expect to gain valuable insights into potentially mislabeled instances. We will use these to refine the sepsis labels, retrain the final model with adjusted labels, and reassess the model performance.

impacting performance of trained supervised ML model with hidden sepsis patterns being uncovered. To address this, we propose an assessment on the quality of Sepsis ICD9 code labelling within the MIMIC-III dataset. Our approach involves conducting clustering analysis on the MIMIC-III dataset, such as K-Means Clustering, and visualising clusters under UMAP with comparisons between model predictions and labels from MIMIC-III dataset.






-------

Creating a referencing system within Zotero to standardise the research management and tags



Specifically, I'm still concerned about:
- Whether we should introduce references to other people using ML in sepsis prediction in our background




______

