
Hi all,
Below is the MoM for today’s meeting:
1. Prepare the unpivoted LABEVENTS table: **Kha due date 31/8**
- Filter by IS_SEPSIS = 1 rows
- Extract 753 flags only, cut into 2 files 376 columns per file

3. Based on 2 files in 1. to create the histogram chart of item flag: **Ashwani + Nyamka due date 3/9**
4. Graph DB for sepsis (optional): Nyamka
5. Age range chart + gender chart for sepsis: **Amy due date 3/9**
6. Describe cleaning HADM_ID in Labevents table in the presentation: **Hamza due date 3/9**
- For records that could not be filled, compute the percentage and decide whether to remove them.

8. Cleanup age > 100
9. QA relating data point to fill into the model: **Alex due date 3/9**

- Consider contact mentors???

11. The deadline to should the slide to Shiv is next Tuesday 5PM. So we need a draft of what to discuss next Monday.

____


**Do we need to add data points to make data regular** 

Dealing with irregular data.
Lstm- Fixed batch size to fit into model
How to fix batch size, when it is 



Do we need to consider the time interval when creating the batch size, or 

Check for categorical data 

Can we have a face to face meeting or teams?
  

For each admission. Get all data points within four hours. If more than 40, we cut, if less then we add more. 

See the distribution within them. 

  

Bar chart showing “Number of hadm ID with the same rows within one hour” - count of number of rows



  

____  

Backward propagation to find the difference between the range
Mean



___

Bar chart
Set up a threshold
* separate charts per result

____



Check delta values 
- proportion with sepsis


* Push age bins

___



