source of organ failure,

ecoli (microbiology)
source of infection is mostly uti

immune response can cause - kidney failure

most likely to come from pneumonia


because they are ICD9 codes, we won't know the pathways, unless we know the pathways.
We need the pathway. The timeline.

How to query PDFs

High glucose - for diabetic people 

Causal overlay - 

"prospective multisite study of patient outcomes after implementation of the trews"
- give features, but not their mapping


Time of patient, on average


Have to use class weights. Have to specify them when training the model. 


* left join - include everything.


Log regression - get Log risk score for free

RF: use sample weights and class weights. 




Fall unrelated to mechanism of injury
"Fall"
"surgical site"


------






  

# Shiv  

- feature selection? should just add more from few

- Lab events table, we have many first tests occurring before the admit time

  
- minimum of them - admit or chart time

  

Scaling and normalisation
	* different units, some with percentage

  

**Test train split**
- stratified - are we doing it correctly? 90/10

  

average number of labevents - add all lab events, divide by total number of hadm_id in that period - blood tests

  

What other hyperparameters are important?
Feature importances that are common to many models


Age - categorise?

Do we give weighting to particular parameters?


It is not stateless. Can use different times

  

red blood cells - in urine, not in count

Shock index
eGRF

  

How is mental state recorded?
GCS -- less than 15 is poor cognignitive state

GLASGOW COMA SCALE Neurological Evaluation CHARTEVENTS
26 SUPPLEMENTAL OXYGEN (Y/N) Nursing Documentation CHARTEVENTS
27 VENTILATOR Nursing Documentation CHARTEVENTS
28 ALTERED MENTAL STATUS Nursing Documentation CHARTEVENTS

  

Derived scores:
SYSTOLIC BP x AGE Engineered Feature Derived
6 SHOCK INDEX (HR/SYSTOLIC BP) Engineered Derived
7 SHOCK INDEX x AGE Engineered Derived

  
---- 

Chart events 
Only use: Respiratory rate, oxygen rate, heart rate
for the first 4 hours

------


acute liver disease
metastatic cancer

_____

papers with high number of citations
nature of medicine

____
* Filter out neonatal patients (patients under 18)

____



We need GPU to run the language model


____


NOTEEVENETS.csv

___

model is stateless - doesn't carry across previous state. 

To use sequential data

Auto-encoder


-----

Add more features to see if this increases the accuracy

____


creating random sin curves (3000)

shrinking the dimensions (3000, 256, 1) to (3000, 32, 1)

Use maxpull




________
freeze the weights, it is two fold

Cluster these values, you will get 

____

Knowledge distillation : 
split training and test to 80 / 20
split 80% to 50/50
do autoencoder on one thing, get compressed values
When you're training the meta model, you 


___
column wise compression



____

www.mk.azure.com
Automated Machine learning 


____

standardise, not normalise for logits
not min max!


____

calibration 
for confidence 

___

balanced accuracy

____


Box plots would be good. 
For incremental changes. 


Boxplot for each HADM ID

From first test 

_____ 


Creatinine
WBC
Lymphocytes
Age
Neutrophils