
#transcript



* Generating SSH key to access the database via the RPH server
* Investigating EDA tools

Neo4j
	Py Neo4j
	cypher queries
	Ingesting CSV into Neo4j
	
PowerBI

ETL toolkit
#res



#transcript 

#rph_q

Alarm fatigue in staff - if the alert is only short, then they will shut it off

@ 5:35 in the recording - some em predic???

For now, we focus only on what we have at RPH
UMAP 	- autoencoder
	- Fiona Stanley, RPH, Sir Charles Gardiner 
	- if you see something of a distinct colour, then it means that the model cannot generalise across all hospitals
	- if you have uniformly distributed, then you can have a monolithic model that works for all hospitals. 




--------------------------------------------------------

Time is a feature

data across multiple hospitals may be different, we only look at the specific RPH 


- starts at ward, not in ED


Time that they're admitted to the time that they are discharged, the sepsis risk score should keep changing, updating as it has more data

Upon reaching the ward, they have:
- Past admission data (history of high blood pressure, diabetes, other complications, predisposition to sepsis)
- triage notes (what they tell the triage nurse)

- temperature, blood pressure, heart rate
- pathology - bloods (white blood cells, CRP)








So, for the prediction of the risk for sepsis, you expect it to have time series.
 So that's not only time series, but it also takes in -  it's a multimodal machine learning more. 

can use something like a traditional machine learning model, like random forest or GBM, and ensembles. But then you have to look out for subject matter there. And then you need to know, you have to lump them together. It's not like time series prediction.

And it doesn't keep track of the state. So it may just show that risk is 10. And it may go back to five.



Unknown Speaker  4:41  
And there's alarm fatigue in staff.
 If you suddenly see like it's going up then but goes to five, they won't even trust it, they'll shut it off. Right. So these algorithms have to be like, need to sustain that risk. So only if you are sure so that's when you would have access to it.



Unknown Speaker  5:05  
stateful LSTM


@5:21
Bag of Words tied to LSDM.
word to Vec tied to LSTM
attention tied to LSTM
	- if you use attention, you have to think that this multimodal data, you're adding things


Unknown Speaker  5:50  
time is also a feature. 
So if you are have actually having no data, you can take the clock, and see how it predicts because that's time right time. If you stay more time in the hospital, there's more risk of death or more risk of sepsis. So even if you did don't get any data points, you can take the clock, like and see how the risk changes when you increment the length of stay and see how the risk would change. 



Unknown Speaker  8:41  
Sorry, we know it's consistently wrong. So if our prediction Yeah, so you set a confidence interval. So if your confidence interval is zero, that means it's opposite.

Unknown Speaker  8:52  



Use Logits to get log odds ratio
A few logistic regression models
The exponential that you have gives you some kind of relative comparison between 

 So the way you would get that score, like a risk score is from only few models, which is called logits. Logistic Regression, right. So that gives you a log odds ratio. So, so the exponential that you have, so that gives you some kind of relative comparison between


(9:32  two dimensions / true or false / ??)

 Okay. So you're predicting time series.
you can either predict survival score, which is based on survival analysis,
	- you can look at something called Deep surv 




something to keep to think about is we are predicting the onset of sepsis
we have to see when a sepsis event occurs


Unknown Speaker  10:10  
Look to [[TREWS]] - prior existing model based on ML. We are to mimic the same thing
We want some relative risk
TREWS is the main to research



Not limited to ML model, but want some relative risk

LSTM, map like clustering, TREWS



Unknown Speaker  11:34  
predict the risk of the onset of sepsis. 

predict the risk for each patient at current time, based on changing data points. 
	- using time series like heart rate, respiratory rate.
	- as well as other none time series data











CSV data


We will have to do prior processing


RPH Hospital data
Have to mix the RPH data with the MIMIC-III data to make it more generalisable
	- otherwise the mappings will look red / blue





Try diff models, don't have an expectation for minimum
TREWS performance was 0.8 AUC

Inclusion criteria is important -- what data do we select to model from










End of Life feeling is usually a sepsis diagnosis
Dataset:
	- End of life feeling is not measured 
	- sepsis at triage is not very common
		- usually hospital acquired complication
		- infection that goes unnoticed 











Unknown Speaker  16:22  
You mentioned or end of life feeling and mental ability these sorts of information is obviously not that's usually how they met. It's all day from triage, right? Usually, that's how they actually diagnose sepsis. Ah, okay. I mean, doesn't have to be always this certain parts of it. Okay.

Unknown Speaker  16:43  
But the yard mental decline and end of life feeling, how are they? Are they

Unknown Speaker  16:53  
measured?

Unknown Speaker  16:54  
They don't actually mention this is this is if you go to a GP, maybe they'll ask you all these questions, and then they'll tell you, Okay, go to the IDI, okay, then they'll give you the referral. Okay, but not dataset, time temperature is measured.

Unknown Speaker  17:11  
Blood pressure is measured, low blood pressure, respiratory rate and heart rate are measured. So they have a low heart rate, but it's different for each patient can't have. If it is that easy, then that wouldn't be machine learning. Yes. So that'll be

Unknown Speaker  17:30  
with just two notes.





Unknown Speaker  18:01  
 that may actually progress
So if they think that they have septicemia, they write it down in the triage notes.

Unknown Speaker  18:22  
So if you have septicemia, and the triage nodes, and you detect that this guy is going to have sepsis, that's the data leakage. So you have a label and the target there. Like you have a target and the predictor.
So that's the data leakage. 



data leakage = if you have a target, as one of your predictors or as one of your features -- so the machine learning would give you 100% accuracy.

	-  So we shouldn't include septicemia in triage Notes in the training of our model...



ICD codes = feature to indicate that one patient has sepsis
	- coded after six weeks, 













but you shouldn't have to matter because ICD codes is how you would

Unknown Speaker  20:00  
I label whether this admission had sepsis. Okay, that's but you wouldn't use that as a feature. You won't use that as a predictor? Yes, sure. Sure. Yeah, you could use past ICD codes as predictor, but not the current one, because it's not yet there when the patient is admitted. It only comes after six weeks after they're discharged. 50.

Unknown Speaker  20:25  
Like, make sure that our prediction is correct. Yes. And also, you can use the past ICD codes like from the previous admission.

Unknown Speaker  20:34  
So there is also coding date. So the ICD codes are, so the way it works in Australia is after a patient is discharged, the hospital bills, the federal government saying we have so many cases for this patient. So you need to give us so much money. So you kind of get a sense. Yes. Sorry. Sorry. This seems please continue.

Unknown Speaker  21:00  
I forgot. Are you talking about ICD codes holder? Does

Unknown Speaker  21:05  
the data

Unknown Speaker  21:09  
Okay, thank you

Unknown Speaker  21:14  
in this ICT course, like what is this

Unknown Speaker  21:18  
recipe, what is different like this? So I see the course. Okay, so.

Unknown Speaker  21:26  
Okay.

Unknown Speaker  21:28  
So that's about telling what the whole admission is about. So if you look at ICD nine codes, that tells you, so

Unknown Speaker  21:41  
it's it like maps,

Unknown Speaker  21:43  
to exactly as it made

Unknown Speaker  21:47  
for a specific illness or like a kind of grouping of it can be multiple, multiple, if you have, say, stomach pain, and also sepsis. So that coded for both stomach pain, sepsis, and if you have diabetes, lateral diabetes, so that's going to be quite problematic for us, when we're going through the dataset we will need, surely we would need to be filtering based on patients that just had sepsis alone, or you should have patients also without sepsis without sepsis. Okay, but does it then. So that's the highly data imbalance. Okay. So you have patients is much smaller than others. Yeah, sure.

Unknown Speaker  22:27  
Okay, so let's start with the

Unknown Speaker  22:36  
basics.

Unknown Speaker  22:39  
I think that that patient going to be having multiple is during

Unknown Speaker  22:44  
during the hospital, ICU.

Unknown Speaker  22:48  
Maybe I can

Unknown Speaker  22:49  
just

Unknown Speaker  22:51  
do

Unknown Speaker  22:53  
it just grabbing the information.

Unknown Speaker  22:56  
Yeah, just for these ICD coding, because from the PDF document will be saved is that like 50 to 60% off subset case, Amis during the clinical costs? So is it different between these ICD coding and these clinical coding? Yes, yes, it's the same. It's the same, it's the same. So when we look at the target, we just set but still there will be 50 to 60% of them will be mysteries. Yes. So it has subsets but they didn't have to go the order.

Unknown Speaker  23:27  
Okay.

Unknown Speaker  23:30  
Is that I understand like that, like,

Unknown Speaker  23:33  
there would be multiple times for doing the coping, right? Like, at first when dammit, no, no, only once the patient is discharged off the beat the quarters look at what the patient went through. So then they say, Oh, this guy had this infection at this time this I have this infection. So I will give him this code this code with this code. So just one time

Unknown Speaker  24:00  
and after at that moment, we can still miss the this the subset.

Unknown Speaker  24:08  
So it means that the data that we have here, maybe they are like half of the steps that maybe maybe no one knows that's a statistical study. But still clues actually gets it like pointed. Like that's quite, that's pretty, that's quite good. So on the opposite side, which means the precision is pretty good.

Unknown Speaker  24:30  
On the other side, it means that all the patients who are predicted another

Unknown Speaker  24:36  
diagnosis, sepsis means they are really sensitive. Okay.

Unknown Speaker  24:45  
Regarding this particular confusion that I had, and through all the documents regarding sepsis, but also know like the timeframe between the two detection because they

Unknown Speaker  24:57  
they, I saw this particular page

Unknown Speaker  25:00  
For that timeframe was very important. Very good time to event it's called Time to event is like six seven hours before the event happens if you can detect it will be pretty good

Unknown Speaker  25:15  
given

Unknown Speaker  25:18  
a thought that I showed you so if you can mimic something like cruise

Unknown Speaker  25:23  
for the dataset dynamics

Unknown Speaker  25:27  
it's a cruise also has on mimic.

Unknown Speaker  26:05  
I, so I was also reading that the,

Unknown Speaker  26:10  
the treatment is antibiotic FX. Right. So, given that as well, what I mean, the risk factor of giving antibiotics surely should be taken into account for this because it's not, it's not date incredibly dangerous to the patient. So whether or not it's, we have like a 60% or 80% or should we? Yeah, there's the sort of like leeway between saying, Okay, you may have this, so it's, it's easier, this general antibiotic, but then once they actually figured out what the cause for sepsis is, that's when they go into a specific antibiotic, okay. So general antibiotic may not work for sepsis.

Unknown Speaker  26:58  
So, usually, so they administer general antibiotics, correct, that information also is there okay. On when they when they start what truck

Unknown Speaker  27:10  
they show you a family

Unknown Speaker  27:13  
Okay.

Unknown Speaker  27:20  
All right. So

Unknown Speaker  27:24  
really think that data, so many data sets, we send us so

Unknown Speaker  27:40  
sorry, just returning to the general antibiotic, if that. So if that information is given to us within as in time,

Unknown Speaker  27:51  
time series, it will be part of the time series data like when it's administered. So that's relational data set. Yes, it will give you a timestamp and when it was administered, but time series is like heart rate, respiratory rate that has continued Cigna? Yeah, yeah. So this is more of structured database.

Unknown Speaker  28:10  
So it's like a CSV.

Unknown Speaker  28:23  
So, for example, here,

Unknown Speaker  28:29  
over here, I

Unknown Speaker  28:31  
can tell

Unknown Speaker  28:34  
is there any score or indication that we have to give, we're making it all the time,

Unknown Speaker  28:41  
these days to have two sets versus two

Unknown Speaker  28:45  
timeframes so that we can I think we can compare it and be assured? If during survival analysis, we have anything within that particularly short time? So that's the thing. So when you actually how do they know we need to go? What type of scoring system they're using, because, oh my

Unknown Speaker  29:06  
god, I think, and I have six hours

Unknown Speaker  29:11  
to catch the prediction, that's pretty good.

Unknown Speaker  29:15  
But you have to make sure that then risk score 10 or above leaves still accepts the service, which is coded in your ICD 10. So that patient had sepsis.

Unknown Speaker  29:28  
If the 10 tells you that this patient didn't have sepsis, I think that's

Unknown Speaker  29:41  
somewhat related, risk related,

Unknown Speaker  29:44  
focuses on risk score,

Unknown Speaker  29:47  
relative risk.

Unknown Speaker  29:49  
So scores ranges from one toes, it can be anything, but you have to tell that okay, over 40 or 50

Speaker 1  0:00  
Do you have to tell that, okay, over 40 or 50 is sepsis, or over 20 is sepsis. So they get an understanding of how these it's called risk stratification. So you have to say that these are the compartments, which are highly risk to sepsis. So that's more of a statistical study. So that's more like you look at the stats, and say that with a p p value, you say that this percent of people with this sepsis risk ended up having sepsis. So you mentioned a confidence interval

Speaker 2  0:46  
the the current scoring, or the the metric that your hospital currently uses to score sepsis and or, yeah, it's that relevant at all to this project? Or will it impact the way if if this algorithm gets put into place like the transition from perhaps the nurse? Yeah. Do we need to be consistent with the current system? I'm just Yeah.

Speaker 3  1:18  
Sure. So is there any like the one that you showed us about the risk of the patient? Is it a scaling system, like from one to 44? Some, which is the risk,

Speaker 1  1:35  
anything over nine is medium risk of death? That's for death in the hospital?

Speaker 2  1:46  
It's very amazing that you've been able to set that up. I just, it's incredible seeing something like this in action.

Speaker 1  1:53  
It's changing. We have short stuff. Yes. So we'd love to find for alternate ways to getting patients out the hospitals as quickly because the occupancy is 80% is pretty high. Yeah. So we'll have to discharge someone to get someone more acute. Ben

Speaker 3  2:22  
if the risk is if it's above nine, so it's the break. So how about higher like,

Speaker 1  2:30  
if you have 30 or more, first you're going to die?

Speaker 2  2:37  
And are we? Because sepsis goes in terms of scaling already goes from sepsis, sepsis, one sepsis to sepsis shock into these three stages, three stages. Do we go? Do we? Would it be indicative of like sepsis? One on you don't have done? It's just great.

Speaker 4  3:05  
Yeah. So even though like you're kind of like jumping around, but I think we most likely go through all our questions and seeing the question.






Speaker 5  3:16  
And one last thing that I had in mind, regarding the steps of the severity of the sepsis, are you expecting our model to detect ventricular stem or the general three stages of success.


But our focus is not the stages of acceptance. Whether it is first stage or sickness, if it is, first, we have to predict whether it will reach into the success state or not. Anyway. That's a little concerned.


So did you kind of get a sense?

Speaker 4  3:59  
Yeah. And so um, we also look at we have two optional tasks, like for calculating score, and also the

Speaker 1  4:08  
time to event is a hard thing. That's two that's using survival analysis. Have you survival before? So what? survival analysis? So what's your background? Yes,

